---
layout: post
title:  "Urd Example - Part 2:  Let Urd Keep Track of Datasets"
date:   2020-07-13 00:00:00
categories: example
---

Urd is the Norse godess of the past.  It is also the name of the
Accelerator's database that keeps track of built jobs and their
dependencies.

In this post, we show how to import a list of files and create a
dataset chain and how to *store and retrieve the constructed dataset
chain using Urd*.

The presented solution will automatically handle the case when new
files are added to a project.  Re-running the build script will import
and chain all files that are new since the last run.  References in
Urd will be updated as well, and previous references will still be
available for reproducibility.  Data is never lost or overwritten
using the Accelerator.

This is the second part of a series of three posts.  The other posts
are [Part 1: Plain Import of a List of Files](/example/2020/07/13/urd1.html) and
[Part 3: Appending New Columns to an Existing Dataset Chain](/example/2020/07/13/urd3.html).



# Background

Urd keeps track of jobs and their dependencies on other jobs.  Two key
Urd concepts are the _session_ and the _list_.

 - An Urd *session* is a set of Accelerator jobs that are tied
together by a timestamp.  A session can contain references to other
sessions.

 - An Urd *list* is a list of sessions that are stored in increasing
   timestamp order and shares a commmon name (or "key").

Any session could be looked up if we know the timestamp and the name
of the list.  For example, when importing a list of files, each import
is stored in its own session using an unique timestamp, and all
sessions are located in one list, for example named `import`.

It should be noted that Urd timetamps can be either an integer, a
timestamp with resolution ranging from years up to micro seconds, or a
tuple containing both.  This makes indexing of sessions very flexible.



# A Build Script for Importing Files and Storing References in Urd

We want to import these files in date order and create a dataset chain.

```
files = (
        ('2009-01', 'yellow_tripdata_2009-01.csv'),
        ('2009-02', 'yellow_tripdata_2009-02.csv'),
        ('2009-03', 'yellow_tripdata_2009-03.csv'),
)
```

The difference from the [previous post](/example/2020/07/13/urd1.html)
is that here, each file has a _timestamp_.  Urd will associate each
timestamp with a session of jobs used for that particular import.
Thus, we can ask Urd to return a session containing the state of any
import or data processing operation, the way it looked at any
particular instance in time!  This is extremely powerful!

Here is a complete build script that will import and chain the files
in increasing time order, as well as storing sessions with references
to all jobs together with their timestamp in Urd.

```python
1: def main(urd):
2:         key = 'import'
3:         last_import = urd.peek_latest(key).timestamp
4:         for ts, filename in files:
5:                 if ts > last_import:
6:                         urd.begin(key, ts)
7:                         previous = urd.latest(key).joblist.get(-1)
8:                         urd.build('csvimport', filename=filename, previous=previous)
9:                         urd.finish(key)
```

Detailed explanation:

- We start with line 8.  This is the line that does the actual
  importing of the file.  The method needs to know the name of the
  file to import, and also, since we want the datasets to be chained,
  we provide a `previous` that points to the previous import.

- Then, lines 6 and 9 defines an Urd session for this import.  The
  session is associated with a key and a timestamp.  The key binds the
  import of all the files together to an Urd _list_, and the timestamp
  is used to identify individual jobs.

- Line 7 finds the reference to the previous import job.  This is done
  by asking Urd for the latest job that is associated with the given
  key.  If there is no such job, `previous` will be set to `None`.
  (See below for explanation of the `get(-1)`.)

  Note that `urd.latest` instructs Urd "under the hood" to attach this
  dependency to the Urd session.  Therefore, it can only be issued inside
  a running Urd session.


This concludes the actual Urd session and importing, in addition

- line 3, early in the script, we ask Urd for the latest import so
  far.  This will be our starting point.  (We cannot use `urd.latest`
  since we are not recording an Urd session.  Instead we use
  `urd.peek_latest`, which is the same thing, but without dependency
  recording.)

- lines 4 and 5 loop over all files and timestamps, and issues an Urd
  session with import _only for those files that it has not imported
  on a previous run_.

The `urd.joblist.get(-1)` might seem cryptic.  Actually the `joblist`
is a kind of a list, that has an additional class method `get()` that
works kind of like `dict.get()`.  The argument could be either a
method name, or an index.  Index `-1` corresponds to the last index in
the list.  If this does not exist (i.e. the `joblist` is empty),
`get` will return `None`.

Why `-1` then?  It is because it is common that sessions contain
several jobs, doing various processing of the imported data, and the
dataset in the last job is typically what we want to continue working
on.

# Running the build script

As usual, a build script named `build_<name>` is run using `ax run <name>`,
so if the script is named `build_import.py`, we do

```
% ax run import
```


## Inspecting the Urd Database

Now, let us investigate what has been stored in the Urd database.  We
use the `ax curl`-command to talk directly to the Urd server.

First, let us list all the Urd lists.

```
% ax curl list
[
    "<user>/import",
]
	
```

There is only one urd list, named `import`, recorded.  Let us list all
its timestamps:

```
% ax curl <user>/import/since/0
[
    "2009-01",
    "2009-02",
    "2009-03"
]
```

(We asked for all timestamps are larger than '0'.  All valid
timestamps sort after zero.  Replace '0' by an actual timestamp to see
only more recent entries.)

We can look at a single entry like this

```
% ax curl <user>/import/2009-01
{
    "timestamp": "2020-01",
    "user": "<user>",
    "build": "import",
    "joblist": [
        [
	    "csvimport",
	    "dev-0"
	]
    ],
    "deps": {},
    "caption": ""
}
```								    

What is returned here in pretty printed JSON is basically the Urd
session object that is returned by `urd.latest()` and its siblings.

(If we want to see the latest entry only there is a shortcut `ax curl <list>/latest`.)



## How to Fetch the Imported Dataset Chain from Another Build Script

Now that the import jobs are stored in an Urd list, we can retrieve
them in another build script and do some data processing

```python
def main(urd):
    impjob = urd.peek_latest('import').joblist[-1]
    # "imp" is now a jobid to the latest import job, use it for example like this
    urd.build('process', source=imp)
```

Here we access the last item in the `joblist` directly, since we want
execution to fail immediately if there is no job to be found.  (Look
at the JSON-version of the Urd session object above.  What we get from
`peek_latest` is an Urd session object, that has an attribute
`joblist`, which contains jobids to all jobs in the session.  There is
only one job in the list, so we fetch the last and only job from the
session.)

Note again that we use `peek_latest()` which is the non-recording
version of `latest()` for use outside of Urd sessions.



## Fetch Imported Dataset and Create a new Processing Session

This is a common pattern.  We fetch a particular version
(timestamp) of the jobs in an Urd list, and process the data stored
there.  The processing we do is also stored in Urd in _another_ list,
but with the _same_ timestamp:

```python
def main(urd):
    key = 'process'
    urd.begin(key)
    urditem = urd.latest('import')
    ts = urditem.timestamp
    impjob = urditem.joblist[-1]
    urd.build('process', source=impjob)
    urd.finish(key, ts)
```

Note here how the timestamp for the `import` session is extracted and
inserted into the `process` session.  Furthermore, using
`urd.latest()` inside the session will make sure that the dependency
from the `import` session will be stored in the `process` session.

To see this dependency, we run the build script above and then we take
a look at Urd.

```
% ax curl list
[
    "<user>/import",
    "<user>/process"
]
```

A new Urd-list `process` has been created.  What timestamps does it contain?

```
% ax curl <user>/process/since/0
[
    "2009-03"
]
```

Same timestamp as the last import job, from where we fetched the
dataset chain we used as input.  The Urd session:

```
% ax curl <user>/process/2009-03
{
    "timestamp": "2009-03",
    "build": "process",
    "user": "<user>",
    "joblist": [
        [
            "process",
            "dev-3"
        ]
    ],
    "caption": "",
    "deps": {
        "<user>/import": {
            "caption": "",
            "joblist": [
                [
                    "csvimport",
                    "dev-2"
                ]
            ],
            "timestamp": "2009-03"
        }
    }
}
```

Here we can see the jobid to the `process` job, which is `dev-3`, as
well as its dependencies.  In this case, the dependency is the
`import` Urd list at timestamp `2009-03`, holding the `csvimport` job
`dev-2`.

Using the Accelerator, everything compute step is traceable all the
way back to its source code and input data!


